# 16/08/2019 - Kashmir & Article 370: India's Tactical Blunder Which Will Be A Strategic Success


On 5 August the Indian government repealed Articles 370 and 35A of the Indian Constitution, which granted the state of Jammu & Kashmir (J&K) the ability to govern its own affairs barring external matters such as defence and foreign policy. 35A gave the state government the ability to designate “permanent residents” and give them special rights, such as that of owning land. The Modi government further split the state into two new units. One contains the Kashmir valley and Jammu, and is unsurprisingly named Jammu and Kashmir. The other is called Ladakh containing the districts of Leh and Kargil. Kashmir and Kargil are Muslim majority, Jammu is Hindu majority while Leh is majority Buddhist. In addition to this, a suspension of all communications was instituted across the state, and tourists were ordered to evacuate as the army was brought in. While J&K was previously a state, the new units are Union Territories which enjoy more limited powers and have greater control from the Union (central) government. 

All this of course begs the question whether this is a blunder or a success.The revocation of Article 370 itself isn’t some constitutional coup. The article itself had a provision for abrogation, provided the assent of the J&K government. This is where Modi got very slick. The J&K state government (a coalition between the local PDP party and Modi’s BJP) had been dissolved in 2018 since it lost a majority in the state legislature so J&K had been under central government rule as outlined in the Indian Constitution and accepted by the state. Since J&K was under de facto central control, he could obtain the agreement of the state government via a Presidential order and then easily pass through the abrogation resolution with his large majorities in both houses of Parliament. This is quite important because changing J&K’s legal status effectively without consulting the population greatly damages the prestige of the “world’s largest democracy”. Constitutional scholars are quite divided on the legitimacy of this move. More critically for the domestic front however, resentment will balloon in the areas like the Kashmir valley, which have been fertile grounds for insurgent groups. Finally, it sets a dangerous precedent for India’s federal structure as a future government could exploit states under temporary central control. 
									
If, however, one accepts that the status quo with the Lines of Control is the only reasonable resolution then it is logical for India, Pakistan, and China to integrate their shares of J&K into their countries. From that perspective, Modi’s action makes long term sense despite its incredibly heavy handed imposition. In order to be able to reap any domestic benefits from this however, it’s vital that Modi lift the crackdown as soon as security considerations permit it and he really follow through on his promise for accelerating the state’s development to offset the immensely negative short term impacts.

On the international stage, Modi’s manoeuvre appears to have been a tactical gamble that has really paid off. The two key realities that govern J&K are the heavy handedness of the Indian administration and Pakistan’s strategic use of terrorist groups to foment unrest in Indian administered territory. One key asymmetry however has been that generally Pakistan has held the initiative in Kashmir since it is a more fundamental issue for Pakistan, to some degree a raison d’être. Modi’s abrogation of 370 has caught Pakistan largely unawares and has sent Pakistani diplomats scrambling to the international community looking for help. The response has been largely muted. China is the only UNSC country actively denouncing the step (unsurprising because of its control over Aksai Chin) but maintains that the Kashmir issue is a bilateral issue as India wants. The UK has been largely ambivalent, while Russia and the US have reaffirmed that it remains a bilateral issue and their relationship with India is unaffected. This is a blow to Pakistan’s prestige, which no doubt Modi’s nationalist government is relishing. Imran Khan’s independence day address, delivered from Pakistani Kashmir, focused more on Hindustan than it did on Pakistan - not a particularly good look. This move also may have ramifications for the potential American withdrawal from Afghanistan as it does not grant Pakistan the luxury of focusing mainly on its western front knowing that it holds the initiative to its east. Pakistan's US ambassador has said Pakistan may have to redeploy troops to its east from the Afghan border potentially complicating an American withdrawal. It is in India's interest to prolong the American presence in Afghanistan owing to the strong links between Pakistan's ISI and the Taliban which will almost certainly take power again in some form following a US withdrawal.  

Given all this, it remains harder than ever to see a solution that doesn't maintain the current de facto borders barring some improbable change in circumstances. The sooner both sides abandon their vain quest for prestige on the Roof of the World, the better for all involved.  
